It is ironic that our greatest friend and our most significant enemy, resides in us, and it is none other than our own Mind. Let’s dive deep to know how this small little thing can act both as a host and a parasite at the same time.

I’ve always been a proponent of the Two Minds theory. Though I have added my own flavor to it to make it easier to understand. For every situation we face, there are two minds that work inside us and help us drive the decision. You might have noticed that you have conflicting thoughts about a certain thing. It is the two minds fighting with each other. The one who wins is the decision maker and takes control. Mostly, one has positive reactions towards situations and the other is so negative that we even begin to question and doubt ourselves. This feeling of doubt and guilt can affect our character and have long term effects. Let’s talk about this parasitic mind and how we can make peace with it.

The negative mind, as I call it, is a result of the backlog that our mind holds. Since the time we become conscious of our thoughts, our mind starts to learn from every situation we face and from other people’s handling of certain situations. It is one of the perfect examples of unsupervised machine learning in my opinion. These situations include the ones where things didn’t go very well or as we expected them to turn out. From here, our negative mind gets a lead and it stores this information and uses it to alert us in the future when such a situation arises. Sometimes this alert helps us to take wise decisions, but most of the time, it clogs our mind and critically impacts our decision-making capability. When the negative mind is left unchecked, it takes over most of the times. This further leads to feelings of self-doubt and over-thinking and we enter the vicious feedback loop from hell as Mark Manson describes it in his bestseller “The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F***”. But we can take control of our mind and override its decision-making capability and break the loop. This is where the host part of our mind comes into play.

The positive mind is also a result of the situations we have faced in our past. But I think there is one more aspect to it. Faith plays a critical role in driving our positive thoughts. It can come from both spiritual means or self-actualization. Our ability to have faith in certain situations increases our productivity and decision-making capacity. One thing that has been proved scientifically is that we cannot stop the thought train. It is there and it will be there. But we can decide whether we should let go of a thought or give attention to it. The only way to break the loop is to break the loop. As they say it, you start by starting. We can let go of the stuff created by negative mind by overriding every negative thought with a positive one. And also, by having faith in our faith and being patient and optimistic.

The existence of these two minds defines our human existence. While the negative mind acts as an alert system and is the core driving force for our stimulus response system, the positive mind helps us to make better decisions and helps us lead an optimistic life. It is on us to create a perfect balance and use these two minds as our friends and to consume the best of both.
