You must have read this in multiple self-help books, find your answers for “Why?”, “What?” and “How?” will follow. Sounds easy, right? But it is not. Let us find out why?

Finding answers to "Why?" is like making a recursive call to a function. Once you get an answer, you need to make another call, and this goes on. But like every other recursive function definition, there is a base condition for everything in life too. All the calls to the "Why?" function converge to one base condition, the purpose. And to add to it, there is high-level purpose and there is low-level purpose. To make it easier and a bit non-technical, let us understand it in this way. High level purpose is for our long-term goals, what we expect from our life in a broader sense. Low-level purpose is more about the actual stuff that we need to do to fulfil our high-level purpose in life. The whole talk about purpose brings us to the second part of the title, Dreams.

There is a mixed bag of opinions among people about dreams. Some say it is impractical to dream big when you know about your present state, some say it is dreams that keep our life going, the sense of purpose again. Well, I agree that you should not indulge in stuff that you know are going to fail at, but the big question is, how do you know that you’re going to fail? If somebody asks me what is the most uncertain thing in the universe, I would say it is human life. You can not even predict about the next second, leave days, months or years. It is highly uncertain. So, if we know that life is uncertain, why should we have dreams, why should we have a purpose? Because that is what keeps us going, our purpose, our dreams, give us the strength to walk the extra mile. Dreams keep our mind occupied, otherwise, it is easy to fall into an other trap, regrets.

Regrets are punishment we give to our mind. We punish our mind when we regret something we did or something we couldn’t do in the past. I came across a book, “The Power of Now” by Eckhart Tolle. He writes in it, “Realize deeply that the present moment is all you have. Make the NOW the primary focus of your life.” That’s where most of us go wrong. We are so indulged in the past and the future, that we forget about the present moment. We are sandwiched between the past and the future. We all know the essence of a burger is in the tikki and not in the bread. We enjoy the tikki when we have it in the burger, but for our life’s burger, we give too much attention to the breads of past and future.

We can truly enjoy our life when we connect all the dots. Finding the answer to “Why?”, committing to our purpose, having no end limit for our dreams, stop punishing our mind by having regrets, and living in the present, because that’s what actually exists, everything else is in our mind.