The first thing that comes to my mind when I think about hope is the famous dialogue by Andy Dufresne from 'The Shawshank Redemption', “Hope is a good thing, may be the best of the things, and no good thing ever dies.”

Twenty Twenty has been a year of hope, perhaps the most hopeful year ever. We saw the world uniting like never before. Everybody came together and sang the song of humanity in unison. The way everybody reacted to this challenge was overwhelming, to say the least. We saw people keeping their differences aside and fighting this together. The two industries that proved their might during this time were, technology and life sciences.

With a crisis of this kind where everybody was forced to stay in their homes, it was the tech industry that made the transition to this new way of living easier. Be it communication platforms or online retail, tech industry proved its worth. Steve jobs once said, “Some people say, ‘Give the customers what they want.’ But that's not my approach. Our job is to figure out what they're going to want before they do.” Everybody was forced to follow his approach during this time. We never thought that we could work from our home, or we could consult doctors from our home, or have parties online, or continue our studies without actually visiting schools or colleges, or attend virtual concerts from the comfort of our home. Technology made it all possible.

In these crying times, the industry that stood up and took the baton was the health and pharmaceutical industry. Health workers risked their lives to treat the affected population. The pharma industry did something that was never done before, be it life saving drugs or vaccines, they worked tirelessly to ensure safe trials and speedy delivery. As the famous quote says, “Prepare for the worst and hope for the best”, we were prepared for this and hoped for the best. And here we are on the other side of the finish line. Vaccination drives have begun worldwide, and our health workers are being inoculated.

Hope was definitely the best thing that drove us through this roller-coaster year. Hope, that this will all be over, and life will get back to normal. The way billions of people patiently stayed at their homes and hoped for this to end was exemplary. Twenty Twenty taught us a lot and never losing hope was the key of all the teachings.

